The Project Gutenberg EBook of The King's Ring, by Zacharias Topelius

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: The King's Ring
       Being a Romance of the Days of Gustavus Adolphus and the
       Thirty Years' War

Author: Zacharias Topelius

Translator: Sophie Öhrwall
            Herbert Arnold

Release Date: February 7, 2019 [EBook #58838]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE KING'S RING ***




Produced by Al Haines









THE KING'S RING

BEING A ROMANCE OF THE DAYS OF

GUSTAVUS ADOLPHUS

AND THE THIRTY YEARS' WAR


TRANSLATED FROM THE SWEDISH OF

ZACHARIAS TOPELIUS

BY

SOPHIE ÖHRWALL AND HERBERT ARNOLD



  _With a Photogravure Portrait of Topelius_
  (missing from source book)



LONDON

JARROLD & SONS, 10 & 11, WARWICK LANE, E.C.

[_All Rights Reserved_]




  _Copyright
  London: Jarrold & Sons
  Boston: L. C. Page & Company_




  CONTENTS.


  INTRODUCTION--WHICH TREATS OF THE SURGEON'S PERSON AND LIFE


  I.--THE KING'S RING.

  CHAPTER

  I. THE BATTLE OF BREITENFELD
  II. THE NOBLEMAN WITHOUT A NAME
  III. LADY REGINA
  IV. LADY REGINA'S OATH
  V. JUDITH AND HOLOFERNES
  VI. THE FINNS AT LECH
  VII. NEW ADVENTURES
  VIII. NÜRNBERG AND LÜTZEN


  II.--THE SWORD AND THE PLOUGH.

  I. A MAN FROM THE PEASANTS' WAR
  II. ASHAMED OF A PEASANT'S NAME
  III. THE SOUTHERN FLOWER COMES TO THE NORTH
  IV. THE PEASANT--THE BURGHERS--AND THE SOLDIER
  V. LADY REGINA ARRIVES AT KORSHOLM
  VI. THE LOVE OF THE NORTH AND THE SOUTH
  VII. THE SIEGE OF KORSHOLM


  III.--FIRE AND WATER.

  I. THE TREASURE FROM THE BATTLEFIELD
  II. TWO OLD ACQUAINTANCES
  III. THE TREASURY
  IV. DUKE BERNHARD AND BERTEL
  V. LOVE AND HATE AGREE
  VI. THE BATTLE OF NÖRDLINGEN
  VII. THE LOST SON
  VIII. THE FUGITIVE LADY
  IX. DON QUIXOTE DE LA MANCHA
  X. KAJANEBORG
  XI. THE PRISONER OF STATE
  XII. THE TEMPTER
  XIII. AVAUNT, EVIL SPIRIT
  XIV. THE JUDGMENT OF THE SAINTS
  XV. BERTEL AND REGINA
  XVI. THE KING'S RING--THE SWORD AND THE PLOUGH--FIRE AND WATER




INTRODUCTION.

WHICH TREATS OF THE SURGEON'S PERSON AND LIFE.

The surgeon was born in a small town of East Bothnia, the same day as
Napoleon I., August 15th, 1769.  I well remember the day, as he always
used to celebrate it with a little party of relatives and a dozen
children; and as he was very fond of the latter, we were allowed to
make as much noise as we pleased, and throw everything into absolute
confusion on this anniversary.

It was the pride of the surgeon's life that he was born on the same day
as the Great Conqueror, and this coincidence was also the cause of
several of his important experiences.  But his pride and ambition were
of a mild and good-tempered kind, and quite different from the powerful
desires which can force their way through a thousand obstacles to
attain an exalted position.  How often does the famous one count all
the victims who have bled for his glory on the battlefield, all the
tears, all the human misery through which his way leads to an
illusionary greatness, perhaps, doomed to last a few centuries at most?

The surgeon used to say that he was a great rogue in his childhood; but
exhibiting good intelligence, he was sent by a wealthy uncle to a
school in Vasa.

At eighteen, with a firkin of butter in a wagon, and seventeen thalers
in his purse, he went to Abo to pass his examination.  This well
accomplished, he was at liberty to strive for the gown and surplice of
an ecclesiastic.  But his thoughts wandered far too often from his
Hebrew Codex to the square where the troops frequently assembled.

"Oh!" thought he, "if I were only a soldier, standing there in the
ranks, and ready to fight like my father, for king and country."

But his mother had placed an emphatic veto on the matter, and exacted a
solemn promise from him that he would never become a warrior.

Before, however, he was through Genesis, an incident suddenly occurred
which completely altered his good intentions.  This was an announcement
in the daily paper from the Medical Faculty, which stated that students
who wished to take service as surgeons during the war could present
themselves for private medical instruction, after which they could
reckon upon being ordered out with five or six thalers per month to
begin with, as the war was at its height.

Now, young Bäck would no longer be denied; he wrote home that as a
surgeon's duty is to take off the limbs of others, without losing his
own, he wished to volunteer.  After some trouble he received the
desired permission.  In a moment the Codex was thrown away.  He did not
learn, he devoured surgery, and in a few months was as capable a
chirurgeon as most others; for in those times they were not very
particular.

Our youthful surgeon was in the land campaigns of 1788 and 1789; but in
1790 at sea; was in many a hard battle, drank prodigiously (according
to his own account), and cut off legs and arms wholesale in a most
skilful way.  He then knew nothing about the coincidence of his birth
with Napoleon's, and therefore did not yet consider himself as under a
lucky star.  He often told the story of the eventful 3rd of July in
Wiborg Bay, when on board the "Styrbjörn" with Stedingk, at the head of
the fleet, they passed the enemy's battery at Krosserort's Point, and
he was struck by a splinter on the right cheek, and carried the mark to
his grave.  The same shot which caused this wound wrought great havoc
in the ship, and whizzing by the admiral's ear, made him stone-deaf for
a time; Bäck with his lancet and palsy drops restored Stedingk's
hearing in three minutes.  Just then the danger was greatest and the
balls flew thick as hail.

The vessel ran aground.

"Boys, we are lost," cried a voice.

"Not so!" answered Henrik Fagel, from Ahlais village, in Ulfsby, "send
all the men to the bow; it is the stern that has stuck."

"All men to the prow," shouted the commander.  Then the "Styrbjörn" was
again afloat, and all the Swedish fleet followed in her wake.  Bäck
used to say:

"What the deuce would have become of the fleet if Stedingk had remained
deaf?"

Everyone understood the old man; he had saved the entire squadron.
Then he used to laugh and add,

"Yes, yes!  You see, brother, I was born on the 15th of August; that is
the whole secret; I am not to be blamed for it."

After the war was over, Bäck went to Stockholm, and became devoted to
the king.  He was young, and needed no reason for his attachment.

"Such a stately monarch," was his only idea.

One day, in the beginning of March, 1792, the surgeon, a handsome
youth--to use his own expression--had through a chamber-maid at
Countess Lantingshausen's, who in her turn stood on a confidential
footing with Count Horn's favourite lackey, obtained a vague inkling of
a conspiracy against the king's life.  The surgeon resolved to act
Providence in Sweden's destiny, and reveal to the monarch all that he
knew, and perhaps a little more.  He tried to obtain an audience of the
king, but was denied by the chamberlain, De Besche.  A second attempt
had the same result.  The third time, he stood in the road before the
royal carriage, waving his written statement in the air.

"What does this man want?" asked Gustave III. of the chamberlain.

"He is an unemployed surgeon," replied De Besche, "and begs your
Majesty to begin another war, that he may go on lopping off legs and
arms."

The king laughed, and the forlorn surgeon was left behind.

A few days afterwards the king was shot.

"I was blameless," the surgeon used to say when speaking of this
matter.  "Had not that damned De Besche been there--yes, I won't say
anything more."

Everyone understood what he meant.  The "if" in the way was also due to
his birthday on the 15th of August.